So we got a custom validator but how can we now turn this into an asynchronous one?
Actually this is really simple,
we just have to return a promise and vuelidate is then able to automatically handle this.
Now first of all I'll check if val is equal to an empty string in which case I'll immediately return
true, true and not false because this validator does not care about whether it's empty or not,
it doesn't treat empty as bad. that's not its job and that's important.
So this returns true if it's empty because then we don't care if it's unique or not,
other validators like required have to take care about whether it's empty or not,
I just want to make sure I don't run my async code which potentially hits my server
if we got no value anyways. So assuming we got a value, we can simply return a promise, so we can simply return
a new promise here
and as you know, a promise gets a function which gets two arguments, resolve and reject and inside this
function which we pass to the promise constructor,
we can then call resolve to simulate that we got a value and here, we simply have to resolve to either
true or false,
so what we previously also returned synchronously.
So here, I can resolve if value is equal to test@test.com, to make this more interesting,
I'll add set timeout here, wait for one second and after this second, I'll execute this function inside
set timeout where I then call resolve,
so now this already is asynchronous.
If we now go back to the application and enter test2 and adjust my validator to check if it's not equal to
test@test.com,
so now test2 should pass. If I now enter test2 again,
nothing changes,
if I switch to test though, after one second this becomes invalid because now we found out, hey it's
invalid because set timeout is done.
That's nice but we actually got a backend on firebase where we store email addresses,
so let's use that backend, backend firebase and there, I need to adjust something in the database to
be able to query the data I want to query. I in the end want to find out whether one of my users here
has an e-mail address
we already registered, for this and this is firebase specific, I'll need to create a so-called index in
my rules set here, for that I'll go into rules and I'll add a key for users referring to my users
node and that also is a javascript object then
and in there, I'll add the special .indexOn key and again this is just exclusive to firebase. It tells
firebase hey there is a key in my users which I want to be able to query,
so here this key then simply is an array, actually I can define multiple keys, here
I'll simply define e-mail,
so now I can search by e-mail once I publish this, I can search by e-mail in all my user objects here,
so here, email. With that, we can go back to our vue code and now write the code to actually reach out
to our server and see if a certain e-mail address is already taken,
so here instead of returning my own promise, I can simply return the result of an axios request. For
that,
I will import axios and in case you didn't watch my axios module, axios is just an alternative to vue resource,
it allows us to make Ajax requests and in main.js, we configure that to always use our firebase
database with this base url.
In case you don't have this set up, go through the axios section first to be able to follow along in
your code until then you can of course watch me do it here,
it'll work in the same way for your own backend.
So I want to use this axios instance, for that,
I need to import it in my script section in the signup file, so I'll import axios from axios and
then axios as learned in that section simply has a get method which allows me to send a get request,
I want to send this to /users.json,
.json is firebase specific and /users is enough because the base path is defined in main.js
.
and now here I don't just want to reach out to it like this,
I of course want to order my data,
I want to see if this email address exists. To filter this on firebase, I need to pass a query parameter,
this is how it works in firebase, might work differently for your own backend, the query parameter
I need to add here is OrderBy
and that should be e-mail, between double quotation marks that's important. Email then refers to this
email node here in my users and I will then chain a criteria,
it's equal to and here, the email address now has to be passed,
so this should now be val, whatever user entered.
Then axios gives me a promise and I'll not return the result of that promise because that would not
be true or false
but the http response so in the then block here, I'll instead if I now have a look at that response and
then return false which will be wrapped into a promise and therefore it can now be used by vuelidate.
It will always invalidate this input though, it will always return false,
we'll fix this soon.
Now with that, one more thing we have to do, the value here
also has to be wrapped between double quotation marks,
so equal to equals double quotation mark
and then also a closing double quotation mark
after the value. And now we can go back to our application, I'll
open the developer tools here so that we can see the javascript console,
now if I enter an email address here, I actually get an unauthorized request here because I in the authorization
section required all users to log in to send http requests,
this is defining the rules of the database.
I don't actually want this to be the case for read requests anymore, so I'll switch this back to just
true which means everyone may read and getting the email address is just reading it.
So with that, if we go back to our application, if I reload it and I try this one more time,
now we get back a response and here, the response is the object where the e-mail address matches.
Now if I do enter email address which we don't have though, I actually get back an empty object,
so if we get back an empty object, we know the email address is still available.
So let's return a check which checks if the response data, that is where this empty object would be stored, if it
is an empty object,
now how do we find out if it is an empty object?
We can simply take advantage of a built-in method on the object object in javascript,
there is a keys method which we can use on the response data and this will give us back an array of all
the keys this object has, now here
if the length is equal to zero, we know it's an empty object and then we want return true because that
means the user picked the email address for which we don't find data on the server.
So now if we go back to our application and I enter test, this becomes invalid, if I enter a valid one, though
it stays valid.
If we go back to test2 which is taken,
it's marked as invalid.
So now with that, we get our own asynchronous validator which really reaches out to the backend and
checks our emails there.
Now one important note here,
currently we're validating on the blur event so whenever I lose focus on this input, that means we don't
send that many requests to the backend, only after the user entered something.
If you were to use the input event which is fired on every keystroke,
well there is the danger of you spamming your backend with your requests because a request gets sent
whenever this validator runs and on input, it runs on every keystroke,
so if you have on keystroke validation, you probably want to add some additional logic, like
the bounce method from the low dash library to group your requests and not send one on every request
but actually add some delay in-between, so that you don't hit your server with too many requests.
But with that, we know how asynchronous validation works and that's another extremely useful thing we
can add to our toolbox.